




---

tags: #Chapter

---
# 12 Causation


"Every Cause has its Effect; every Effect has its Cause;  [[Everything]]  happens according to Law; Chance is but a name for Law not recognized; there are many  [[Plane (esotericism)|planes]]  of causation, but  [[Nothing]]  escapes the Law."-- [[The Kybalion]] .

The great Sixth Hermetic Principle--the Principle of Cause and Effect--embodies the truth that Law pervades the Universe; that nothing happens by Chance; that Chance is merely a term indicating cause existing but not recognized or perceived; that phenomena is  [[Probability distribution|continuous]] , without break or exception.

The Principle of Cause and Effect underlies all  [[Science|scientific]]  thought, ancient and modern, and was enunciated by the Hermetic  [[Education|Teachers]]  in the earliest days. While many and varied disputes between the many schools of thought have since arisen, these disputes have been principally upon the details of the operations of the Principle, and still more often upon the meaning of certain words. The underlying Principle of Cause and Effect has been accepted as correct by practically all the  [[Intellectual|thinkers]]  of the world worthy of the name. To think otherwise would be to take the phenomena of the universe from the domain of Law and Order, and to relegate it; to the control of the imaginary something which men have called "Chance."

A little consideration will show anyone that there is in reality no such thing as pure chance. Webster defines the word "Chance" as follows: "A supposed agent or mode of activity other than a force, law or purpose; the operation or activity of such agent; the supposed effect of such an agent; a happening; fortuity; casualty, etc." But a little consideration will show you that there can be no such agent as "Chance," in the sense of something outside of Law-something outside of Cause and Effect. How could there be a something acting in the phenomenal universe, independent of the laws, order, and continuity of the latter? Such a something would be entirely independent of the orderly trend of the universe, and therefore superior to it. We can imagine nothing outside of THE ALL being outside of the Law, and that only because THE ALL is the LAW in itself. There is no room in the universe for a something outside of and independent of Law. The  [[Existence]]  of such a Something would render all  [[Natural law|Natural Laws]]  ineffective, and would plunge the  [[Universe]]  into  [[Chaos theory|chaotic]]  disorder and lawlessness.

A careful  [[Hypothesis|examination]]  will show that what we call "Chance" is merely an  [[Phrase|expression]]  relating to obscure causes; causes that we cannot perceive; causes that we cannot understand. The word Chance is derived from a word Meaning "to fall" (as the falling of dice), the  [[Idea]]  being that the fall of the dice (and many other happenings) are merely a "happening" unrelated to any cause. And this is the  [[Sense]]  in which the term is generally employed. But when the matter is closely examined, it is seen that there is no  [[Randomness|chance]]  whatsoever about the fall of the  [[Dice]] . Each  [[Time]]  a  [[Death|die]]  falls, and displays a certain number, it obeys a law as infallible as that which governs the  [[Revolution]]  of the  [[Planet|planets]]  around the sun. Back of the fall of the die are causes, or chains of causes, running back further than the mind can follow. The position of the die in the box; the amount of muscular  [[Energy]]  expended in the throw; the condition of the table, etc., etc., all are causes, the effect of which may be seen. But back of these seen causes there are chains of unseen preceding causes, all of which had a bearing upon the number of the die which fell uppermost.

If a die be cast a great number of times, it will be found that the numbers shown will be about equal, that is, there will be an equal number of one-spot, two-spot, etc., coming uppermost. Toss a penny in the air, and it may come down either "heads" or "tails"; but make a sufficient number of tosses, and the heads and tails will about even up. This is the operation of the law of average. But both the average and the single toss come under the Law of Cause and Effect, and if we were able to examine into the preceding causes, it would be clearly seen that it was simply impossible for the die to fall other than it did, under the same circumstances and at the same time. Given the same causes, the same results will follow. There is always a "cause" and a "because" to every event. Nothing ever "happens" without a cause, or rather a chain of causes.

Some confusion has arisen in the minds of persons considering this Principle, from the fact that they were unable to explain how one thing could cause another thing--that is, be the "creator" of the second thing. As a matter of fact, no "thing" ever causes or "creates" another "thing." Cause and Effect deals merely with "events." An "event" is "that which comes, arrives or happens, as a result or consequent of some preceding event." No event "creates" another event, but is merely a preceding link in the great orderly chain of events flowing from the creative energy of THE ALL. There is a continuity between all events precedent, consequent and subsequent. There is a relation existing between everything that has gone before, and everything that follows. A stone is dislodged from a mountain side and crashes through a roof of a cottage in the valley below. At first sight we regard this as a chance effect, but when we examine the matter we find a great chain of causes behind it. In the first place there was the rain which softened the  [[Earth]]  supporting the stone and which allowed it to fall; then back of that was the influence of the  [[Sun]] , other  [[Rain|rains]] , etc., which gradually disintegrated the piece of  [[Rock (geology)|rock]]  from a larger piece; then there were the causes which led to the formation of the mountain, and its upheaval by convulsions of nature, and so on  [[Ad infinitum]] . Then we might follow up the causes behind the rain, etc. Then we might consider the existence of the roof In short, we would soon find ourselves involved in a mesh of cause and effect, from which we would soon strive to extricate ourselves.

Just as a man has two parents, and four grandparents, and eight great-grandparents, and sixteen great-great-grandparents, and so on until when, say, forty generations are calculated the numbers of ancestors run into many millions--so it is with the number of causes behind even the most trifling event or  [[Phenomenon|phenomena]] , such as the passage of a tiny speck of soot before your eye. It is not an easy matter to trace the bit of soot hack to the early period of the world's history when it formed a part of a massive tree-trunk, which was afterward converted into coal, and so on, until as the speck of soot it now passes before your vision on its way to other adventures. And a mighty chain of events, causes and effects, brought it to its present condition, and the later is but one of the chain of events which will go to produce other events hundreds of years from now. One of the series of events arising from the tiny bit of  [[Soot]]  was the writing of these lines, which caused the typesetter to perform certain work; the proofreader to do likewise; and which will arouse certain thoughts in your mind, and that of others, which in turn will affect others, and so on, and on, and on, beyond the ability of man to think further-and all from the passage of a tiny bit of soot, all of which shows the relativity and association of things, and the further fact that "there is no great; there is no small, in the mind that causeth all."

Stop to think a moment. If a certain man had not met a certain maid, away back in the dim period of the Stone Age--you who are now reading these lines would not now be here. And if, perhaps, the same couple had failed to meet, we who now write these lines would not now be here. And the very act of writing, on our part, and the act of reading, on yours, will affect not only the respective lives of yourself and ourselves, but will also have a direct, or indirect, affect upon many other people now living and who will live in the ages to come. Every thought we think, every act we perform, has its direct and indirect results which fit into the great chain of Cause and Effect.

We do not wish to enter into a consideration of Free Will, or Determinism, in this  [[Employment|work]] , for various reasons. Among the many reasons, is the principal one that neither side of the controversy is entirely right-in  [[Fact]] , both sides are partially  [[Rights|right]] , according to the Hermetic Teachings. The  [[Principle]]  of Polarity shows that both are but Half-Truths the opposing poles of Truth. The  [[School of thought|Teachings]]  are that a man may be both Free and yet bound by  [[Metaphysical necessity|Necessity]] , depending upon the meaning of the terms, and the height of Truth from which the matter is examined. The  [[Classical antiquity|ancient]]  writers express the matter thus: "The further the creation is from the Centre, the more it is bound; the nearer the Centre it reaches, the nearer Free is it."

The majority of people are more or less the  [[Slavery|slaves]]  of heredity, environment, etc., and manifest very little Freedom. They are swayed by the  [[Opinion|opinions]] ,  [[Convention (norm)|customs]]  and  [[Thought|thoughts]]  of the outside world, and also by their emotions, feelings, moods, etc. They manifest no Mastery, worthy of the name. They indignantly repudiate this assertion, saying, "Why, I certainly am free to act and do as I please--I do just what I want to do," but they fail to explain whence arise the "want to" and "as I please." What makes them "want to" do one thing in preference to another; what makes them "please" to do this, and not do that? Is there no "because" to their "pleasing" and "Wanting"? The Master can change these "pleases" and "wants" into others at the opposite end of the mental pole. He is able to " [[Free will|Will]]  to will," instead of to will because some  [[Feeling]] , mood,  [[Emotion]] , or environmental suggestion arouses a tendency or desire within him so to do.

The majority of  [[Person|people]]  are carried along like the falling stone, obedient to  [[Environmentalism|environment]] , outside influences and internal  [[Mood (psychology)|moods]] ,  [[Desire|desires]] , etc., not to speak of the desires and  [[Will (philosophy)|wills]]  of others stronger than themselves,  [[Heredity]] , environment, and suggestion, carrying them along without resistance on their part, or the exercise of the Will. Moved like the pawns on the checkerboard of life, they play their parts and are laid aside after the game is over. But the Masters, knowing the rules of the game, rise above the plane of  [[Matter|material]]   [[Life]] , and placing themselves in touch with the higher powers of their  [[Nature]] , dominate their own moods, characters, qualities, and  [[Magnet|polarity]] , as well as the  [[Natural environment|environment]]  surrounding them and thus become Movers in the game, instead of Pawns-Causes instead of Effects. The Masters do not escape the  [[Causality|Causation]]  of the higher planes, but fall in with the higher laws, and thus master circumstances on the lower plane. They thus form a conscious part of the Law, instead of being mere blind instruments. While they Serve on the Higher Planes, they  [[Law|Rule]]  on the Material Plane.

But, on higher and on lower, the Law is always in  [[Scientific method|operation]] . There is no such thing as Chance. The blind goddess has been abolished by  [[Reason]] . We are able to see now, with eyes made clear by  [[Knowledge]] , that everything is governed by Universal Law-that the  [[Infinity|infinite]]  number of laws are but manifestations of the  [[Neoplatonism|One]]  Great Law-the LAW which is THE ALL. It is  [[Truth|true]]  indeed that not a sparrow drops unnoticed by the  [[Mind]]  of THE AL--that even the hairs on our head are numbered--as the scriptures have said There is nothing outside of Law; nothing that happens contrary to it. And yet, do not make the mistake of supposing that Man is but a blind automaton-far from that. The  [[Hermeticism|Hermetic]]  Teachings are that Man may use Law to overcome laws, and that the higher will always prevail against the  [[Social class|lower]] , until at last he has reached the stage in which he seeks refuge in the LAW itself, and laughs the  [[Consciousness|phenomenal]]  laws to scorn. Are you able to grasp the inner  [[Meaning of life|meaning]]  of this?
# Metadata


- frombook [[Kybalion]]