




---

tags: #Chapter

---
# 3 Mental Transmutation 


> "Mind (as well as  [[Metal|metals]]  and elements) may be transmuted, from state to state; degree to degree; condition to condition; pole to pole; vibration to  [[Vibration]] . True Hermetic Transmutation is a Mental Art."--The Kybalion.

As we have stated, the Hermetists were the original alchemists, astrologers, and psychologists,  [[Hermes]]  having been the founder of these  [[School of thought|schools of thought]] . From astrology has grown modern astronomy; from alchemy has grown modern chemistry; from the mystic psychology has grown the modern psychology of the schools. But it must not be supposed that the ancients were ignorant of that which the modern schools suppose to be their exclusive and special  [[Property]] . The records engraved on the stones of Ancient Egypt show conclusively that the ancients had a full comprehensive knowledge of astronomy, the very building of the  [[Pyramid|Pyramids]]  showing the connection between their design and the  [[Research|study]]  of astronomical science. Nor were they ignorant of Chemistry, for the fragments of the  [[Ancient history|ancient]]   [[Writing|writings]]  show that they were acquainted with the chemical properties of things; in fact, the ancient  [[Theory|theories]]  regarding  [[Physics]]  are being slowly verified by the latest discoveries of  [[History of science|modern science]] , notably those relating to the constitution of matter. Nor must it be supposed that they were ignorant of the so-called modern  [[Discovery (observation)|discoveries]]  in psychology--on the contrary, the  [[Ancient Egypt|Egyptians]]  were especially skilled in the science of Psychology, particularly in the branches that the modern schools ignore, but which, nevertheless, are being uncovered under the name of " [[Parapsychology|psychic]]  science" which is perplexing the psychologists of to-day, and making them reluctantly admit that "there may be something in it after all."

The truth is, that beneath the  [[Materials science|material chemistry]] , astronomy and psychology (that is, the psychology in its phase of "brain- [[Action (philosophy)|action]] ") the  [[Classical antiquity|ancients]]  possessed a knowledge of transcendental  [[Astronomy]] , called  [[Astrology]] ; of  [[Transcendence (religion)|transcendental]]  chemistry, called alchemy; of transcendental psychology, called mystic psychology. They possessed the Inner Knowledge as well as the Outer Knowledge, the latter alone being possessed by modern scientists. Among the many secret branches of knowledge possessed by the Hermetists, was that known as Mental Transmutation, which forms the subject matter of this lesson.

"Transmutation" is a term usually employed to designate the ancient art of the  [[Philosopher's stone|transmutation of metals]] --particularly of the base metals into gold. The  [[Logos|word]]  "Transmute"  [[Instrumental and intrinsic value|means]]  "to change from one nature, form, or substance, into another; to transform" (Webster). And accordingly, "Mental Transmutation" means the art of changing and transforming mental states,  [[Theory of forms|forms]] , and conditions, into others. So you may see that Mental Transmutation is the "Art of Mental Chemistry," if you like the  [[Time|term]] --a form of practical Mystic  [[Psychology]] .

But this means far more than appears on the surface. Transmutation, Alchemy, or  [[Chemistry]]  on the Mental Plane is important enough in its effects, to be sure, and if the art stopped there it would still be one of the most important  [[Branches of science|branches]]  of study known to man. But this is only the beginning. Let us see why!

The first of the Seven Hermetic Principles is the Principle of Mentalism, the  [[Axiom]]  of which is "THE ALL is Mind; the Universe is Mental," which means that the Underlying  [[Reality]]  of the Universe is Mind; and the Universe itself is Mental--that is, "existing in the Mind of THE ALL." We shall consider this Principle in succeeding lessons, but let us see the effect of the principle if it be assumed to be true.

If the Universe is Mental in its nature, then Mental Transmutation must be the art of CHANGING THE CONDITIONS OF THE UNIVERSE, along the  [[Line (geometry)|lines]]  of Matter, Force and mind. So you see, therefore, that Mental Transmutation is really the "Magic" of which the ancient;  [[Literature|writers]]  had so much to say in their  [[Mysticism|mystical]]   [[Work of art|works]] , and about which they gave so few  [[Pragmatism|practical]]  instructions. If All be Mental, then the  [[Art]]  which enables one to transmute mental conditions must render the Master the controller of material conditions as well as those ordinarily called "mental."

As a matter of fact,  [[Irreligion|none]]  but advanced Mental Alchemists have been able to attain the degree of power necessary to control the grosser physical conditions, such as the control of the  [[Chemical element|elements]]  of  [[Nature]] ; the production or cessation of tempests; the production and cessation of earthquakes and other great physical phenomena. But that such men have existed, and do exist today, is a matter of earnest belief to all advanced  [[Occult|occultists]]  of all schools. That the Masters exist, and have these powers, the best teachers assure their students, having had experiences which justify them in such  [[Belief]]  and statements. These Masters do not make public exhibitions of their powers, but seek seclusion from the crowds of men, in order to better work their may along the Path of Attainment. We mention their  [[Existence]] , at this point, merely to call your attention to the fact that their  [[Power (social and political)|power]]  is entirely Mental, and operates along the lines of the higher Mental Transmutation, under the Hermetic Principle of  [[Mentalism (philosophy)|Mentalism]] .

    "The Universe is Mental"--The Kybalion.

But students and Hermetists of lesser degree than Masters--the Initiates and Teachers--are able to freely work along the Mental Plane, in Mental Transmutation. In  [[Fact]]  all that we call " [[Psychic|psychic phenomena]] ,"; "mental influence"; "mental science"; " [[New Thought|new-thought]]  phenomena," etc., operates along the same general lines, for there is but one principle involved, no  [[Matter]]  by what name the  [[Phenomenon|phenomena]]  be called.

The student and practitioner of Mental Transmutation works among the  [[Mental plane]] , transmuting mental conditions, states, etc., into others, according to various formulas, more or less efficacious. The various "treatments," "affirmations," "denials" etc., of the schools of mental science are but formulas, often quite imperfect and  [[Scientific method|unscientific]] , of The Hermetic Art. The majority of modern practitioners are quite ignorant compared to the  [[Ancient Greece|ancient]]  masters, for they lack the fundamental  [[Knowledge]]  upon which the  [[Employment|work]]  is based.

Not only may the  [[Mental state|mental states]] , etc., of  [[Neoplatonism|one]] 's self be changed or transmuted by Hermetic  [[Methodology|Methods]] ; but also the states of  [[Other (philosophy)|others]]  may be, and are, constantly transmuted in the same  [[Tao|way]] , usually unconsciously, but often consciously by some  [[Understanding]]  the  [[Law|laws]]  and principles, in cases where the people affected are not informed of the principles of self-protection. And more than this, as many students and practitioners of modern mental  [[Science]]  know, every  [[Materialism|material]]  condition depending upon the minds of other people may be changed or transmuted in accordance with the earnest desire,  [[Free will|will]] , and "treatments" of  [[Person]]   [[Desire|desiring]]  changed conditions of life. The public are so generally informed regarding these things at present, that we do not deem it necessary to mention the same at length, our  [[Intention|purpose]]  at this point being merely to show the Hermetic Principle and Art underlying all of these various  [[Substantial form|forms]]  of practice,  [[Good and evil]] , for the  [[Force]]  can be used in opposite directions according to the Hermetic Principles of  [[Astrological sign|Polarity]] .

In this little book we shall state the basic principles of Mental Transmutation, that all who read may grasp the Underlying Principles, and thus possess the Master-Key that will unlock the many doors of the Principle of  [[Magnet|Polarity]] .

We shall now proceed to a consideration of the first of the Hermetic Seven Principles--the Principle of  [[Mentalism (psychology)|Mentalism]] , in which is explained the  [[Truth]]  that "THE ALL is Mind; the  [[Universe]]  is Mental," in the words of  [[The Kybalion]] . We ask the close  [[Attention]] , and careful  [[Experiment|study]]  of this great Principle, on the part of our students, for it is really the  [[Basic research|Basic]]   [[Principle]]  of the  [[Holism|whole]]   [[Hermeticism|Hermetic Philosophy]] , and of the Hermetic Art of  [[Mind|Mental]]   [[Alchemy|Transmutation]] .
# Metadata


- frombook [[Kybalion]]