




---

tags: #Chapter

---
# 8 Planes Of Correspondence


"As above, so below; as below, so above."-- [[The Kybalion]] .

The great Second Hermetic Principle embodies the truth that there is a harmony, agreement, and correspondence between the several planes of Manifestation, Life and Being. This truth is a truth because all that is included in the Universe emanates from the same source, and the same laws, principles, and characteristics apply to each unit, or combination of units, of  [[Action (philosophy)|activity]] , as each manifests its own phenomena upon its own plane.

For the  [[Intention|purpose]]  of convenience of thought and study, the Hermetic Philosophy considers that the Universe may be divided into three great classes of phenomena, known as the Three Great Planes, namely:

    1. The Great Physical Plane.     2. The Great Mental Plane.     3. The Great Spiritual Plane.

These divisions are more or less artificial and arbitrary, for the truth is that all of the three divisions are but ascending degrees of the great scale of Life, the lowest point of which is undifferentiated Matter, and the highest point that of Spirit. And, moreover, the different Planes shade into each other, so that no hard and fast division may be made between the higher phenomena of the Physical and the lower of the Mental; or between the higher of the Mental and the lower of the Physical.

In short, the Three Great Planes may be regarded as three great groups of degrees of Life Manifestation. While the purposes of this little book do not allow us to enter into an extended discussion of, or  [[Explanation]]  of, the subject of these different planes, still we think it well to give a general description of the same at this point.

At the beginning we may as well consider the question so often asked by the neophyte, who desires to be informed regarding the meaning of the word "Plane", which term has been very freely used, and very poorly explained, in many recent works upon the subject of occultism. The question is generally about as follows: "Is a Plane a place having dimensions, or is it merely a condition or state?" We answer: "No, not a place, nor ordinary dimension of space; and yet more than a state or condition. It may be considered as a state or condition, and yet the  [[Quantum state|state]]  or  [[Necessity and sufficiency|condition]]  is a degree of dimension, in a scale subject to measurement." Somewhat  [[Paradox|paradoxical]] , is it not? But let us examine the matter. A " [[Dimension]] ," you know, is "a measure in a straight line, relating to measure," etc. The ordinary dimensions of space are length, breadth, and height, or perhaps length,  [[Length|breadth]] ,  [[Krull dimension|height]] , thickness or circumference. But there is another dimension of "created things" or " [[Measure (mathematics)|measure]]  in a  [[Line (geometry)|straight line]] ," known to occultists, and to scientists as well, although the latter have not as yet applied the  [[Time|term]]  "dimension" to it--and this new dimension, which, by the way, is the much speculated -about "Fourth Dimension," is the standard used in determining the degrees or "planes."

This Fourth Dimension may be called "The Dimension of Vibration" It is a fact well known to modern science, as well as to the Hermetists who have embodied the truth in their "Third Hermetic Principle," that "everything is in motion; everything vibrates; nothing is  [[Inertia|at rest]] ."  From the highest manifestation, to the lowest, everything and all things Vibrate. Not only do they vibrate at different rates of motion, but as in different directions and in a different manner. The degrees of the  [[Rate (mathematics)|rate]]  of vibrations constitute the degrees of  [[Measurement]]  on the Scale of Vibrations--in other words the degrees of the  [[Spacetime|Fourth Dimension]] . And these  [[Degree (angle)|degrees]]  form what occultists call "Planes" The higher the degree of  [[Information theory|rate]]  of vibration, the higher the plane, and the higher the manifestation of Life occupying that plane. So that while a plane is not "a place," nor yet "a state or condition," yet it possesses qualities common to both. We shall have more to say regarding the subject of the scale of Vibrations in our next lessons, in which we shall consider the Hermetic Principle of Vibration.

You will kindly remember, however, that the Three Great Planes are not actual divisions of the phenomena of the Universe, but merely arbitrary terms used by the Hermetists in order to aid in the  [[Thought]]  and study of the various degrees and Forms of universal activity and life. The atom of matter, the unit of force, the mind of man, and the being of the arch -angel are all but degrees in one scale, and all fundamentally the same, the difference between solely a matter of degree, and rate of vibration--all are creations of THE ALL, and have their existence solely within  [[The Infinite Mind]]  of THE ALL.

The Hermetists sub-divide each of the Three  [[Great Planes Model Manufacturing|Great Planes]]  into Seven Minor Planes, and each of these latter are also sub-divided into seven sub-planes, all divisions being more or less arbitrary, shading into each other, and adopted merely for convenience of scientific study and thought.

The Great Physical Plane, and its Seven Minor Planes, is that division of the phenomena of the Universe which includes all that relates to physics, or material things, forces, and manifestations. It includes all forms of that which we call Matter, and all forms of that which we call Energy or Force. But you must remember that the Hermetic Philosophy does not recognize Matter as a  [[Thing-in-itself|thing in itself]] , or as having a separate existence even in the Mind of THE ALL. The Teachings are that Matter is but a form of Energy--.that is, Energy at a low rate of vibrations of a certain  [[Kindness|kind]] . And accordingly the Hermetists classify Matter under the head of Energy, and give to it three of the Seven Minor Planes of the Great Physical Plane.

These Seven Minor Physical Planes are as follows:

    1. The Plane of Matter (A)     2. The Plane of Matter (B)     3. The Plane of Matter (C)     4. The Plane of Ethereal Substance     5. The Plane of Energy (A)     6. The Plane of Energy (B)     7. The  [[Cartesian coordinate system|Plane]]  of Energy (C)

The Plane of Matter (A) comprises the forms of Matter in its form of solids, liquids, and gases, as generally recognized by the text-books on  [[Physics]] . The Plane of Matter (B) comprises certain higher and more subtle forms of Matter of the existence of which modern science is but now recognizing, the phenomena of Radiant Matter, in its  [[Phase (matter)|phases]]  of radium, etc., belonging to the lower sub-division of this Minor Plane. The Plane of Matter (C) comprises forms of the most subtle and tenuous Matter, the existence of which is not suspected by ordinary  [[Scientist|scientists]] . The Plane of Ethereal Substance comprises that which science speaks of as "The Ether", a substance of  [[Maxima and minima|extreme]]  tenuity and  [[Elasticity (physics)|elasticity]] , pervading all Universal Space, and acting as a medium for the  [[Electric power transmission|transmission]]  of  [[Wave|waves]]  of energy, such as light, heat, electricity, etc. This Ethereal Substance forms a connecting link between Matter (so-called) and Energy, and partakes of the nature of each. The Hermetic Teachings, however, instruct that this plane has seven sub-divisions (as have all of the Minor Planes), and that in fact there are seven ethers, instead of but one.

Next above the Plane of Ethereal Substance comes the Plane of Energy (A), which comprises the ordinary forms of Energy known to science, its seven sub-planes being, respectively,  [[Heat]] ;  [[Light]] ;  [[Magnetism]] ;  [[Electricity]] , and Attraction (including  [[Gravity|Gravitation]] ,  [[Cohesion (chemistry)|Cohesion]] ,  [[Chemical affinity]] , etc.) and several other forms of energy indicated by  [[Experiment|scientific experiments]]  but not as yet named or classified. The Plane of Energy (B) comprises seven subplanes of higher forms of energy not as yet discovered by science, but which have been called "Nature's Finer  [[Force|Forces]] " and which are called into operation in  [[Theophany|manifestations]]  of certain forms of mental phenomena, and by which such phenomena becomes possible. The Plane of Energy (C) comprises seven sub-planes of energy so highly organized that it bears many of the characteristics of "life," but which is not recognized by the minds of men on the ordinary plane of development, being available for the use on beings of the Spiritual Plane alone--such energy is unthinkable to ordinary man, and may be considered almost as "the divine power." The beings employing the same are as "gods" compared even to the highest human types known to us.

The Great Mental Plane comprises those forms of "living things" known to us in ordinary life, as well as certain other forms not so well known except to the occultist. The  [[Categorization|classification]]  of the Seven Minor Mental Planes is more or less satisfactory and arbitrary (unless accompanied by elaborate explanations which are foreign to the  [[Teleology|purpose]]  of this particular work), but we may as well mention them. They are as follows:

    1. The Plane of Mineral Mind     2. The Plane of Elemental Mind (A)     3. The Plane of Plant Mind     4. The Plane of Elemental Mind (B)     5. The Plane of Animal Mind     6. The Plane of  [[Chemical element|Elemental]]  Mind (C)     7. The Plane of Human Mind

The Plane of Mineral Mind comprises the "states or conditions" of the  [[Unit of measurement|units]]  or entities, or groups and combinations of the same, which animate the  [[Optical rotation|forms]]  known to us as "minerals, chemicals, etc." These entities must not be confounded with the molecules, atoms and  [[Corpuscularianism|corpuscles]]  themselves, the latter being merely the material  [[Physical object|bodies]]  or forms of these entities, just as a man's  [[Human body|body]]  is but his material form and not "himself." These entities may be called "souls" in one sense, and are living beings of a low degree of development, life, and mind--just a little more than the units of "living energy" which comprise the higher sub-divisions of the highest  [[Physical plane]] . The average mind does not generally  [[Property (philosophy)|attribute]]  the possession of mind, soul, or life, to the mineral kingdom, but all occultists recognize the existence of the same, and  [[History of science|modern science]]  is rapidly moving forward to the point-of-view of the Hermetic, in this respect. The  [[Molecule|molecules]] , atoms and corpuscles have their "loves and hates"; "likes and dislikes"; "attractions and repulsions". "affinities and non-affinities," etc., and some of the more daring of modern  [[Science|scientific]]  minds have expressed the opinion that the desire and  [[Will (philosophy)|will]] ,  [[Emotion|emotions]]  and  [[Feeling|feelings]] , of the  [[Atom|atoms]]  differ only in degree from those of men. We have no time or  [[Space]]  to argue this matter here. All occultists know it to be a fact, and others are referred to some of the more recent scientific works for outside corroboration. There are the usual seven sub-divisions to this plane.

The Plane of Elemental Mind (A) comprises the state or condition, and degree of mental and vital development of a class of entities unknown to the average man, but recognized to occultists. They are invisible to the ordinary senses of man, but, nevertheless, exist and play their part of the Drama of the Universe. Their degree of intelligence is between that of the mineral and  [[Chemical substance|chemical]]  entities on the one hand, and of the entities of the plant kingdom on the other. There are seven subdivisions to this plane, also.

The Plane of Plant Mind, in its seven sub-divisions, comprises the states or conditions of the entities comprising the kingdoms of the Plant World, the  [[Vitalism|vital]]  and mental phenomena of which is fairly well understood by the average intelligent person, many new and interesting scientific works regarding "Mind and Life in Plants" having been published during the last decade. Plants have life, mind and "souls," as well as have the animals, man, and super-man.

The Plane of Elemental Mind (B), in its seven sub-divisions, comprises the states and conditions of a higher form of "elemental" or unseen entities, playing their part in the general work of the Universe, the mind and life of which form a part of the scale between the Plane of Plant Mind and the Plane of Animal Mind, the entities partaking of the nature of both.

The Plane of  [[Animal cognition|Animal Mind]] , in its seven sub-divisions, comprises the states and conditions of the entities, beings, or souls, animating the animal forms of life, familiar to us all. It is not necessary to go into details regarding this kingdom or plane of life, for the animal world is as familiar to us as is our own.

The Plane of Elemental Mind (C), in its seven sub-divisions, comprises those entities or beings, invisible as are all such  [[Classical element|elemental]]   [[Theory of forms|forms]] , which partake of the nature of both animal and human life in a degree and in certain combinations. The highest forms are semi-human in intelligence.

The Plane of Human Mind, in its seven sub-divisions, comprises those manifestations of life and mentality which are common to Man, in his various grades, degrees, and divisions. In this connection, we wish to point out the fact that the average man of today occupies but the fourth sub-division of the Plane of Human Mind, and only the most intelligent have crossed the borders of the Fifth Sub-Division. It has taken the race millions of years to reach this stage, and it will take many more years for the race to move on to the sixth and seventh sub-divisions, and beyond. But, remember, that there have been races before us which have passed through these degrees, and then on to higher planes. Our own race is the fifth (with stragglers from the fourth) which has set foot upon The Path. And, then there are a few advanced souls of our own race who have outstripped the masses, and who have passed on to the sixth and seventh sub-division, and some few being still further on. The man of the Sixth Sub-Division will be "The Super-Man"; he of the Seventh will be "The Over-Man."

In our consideration of the Seven Minor Mental Planes, we have merely referred to the Three Elementary Planes in a general way. We do not wish to go into this subject in detail in this work, for it does not belong to this part of the general philosophy and teachings. But we may say this much, in order to give you a little clearer idea, of the relations of these planes to the more familiar ones--the Elementary Planes bear the same  [[Relativism|relation]]  to the Planes of Mineral, Plant, Animal and Human Mentality and Life, that the black keys on the piano do to the white keys. The white keys are sufficient to produce music, but there are certain scales, melodies, and harmonies, in which  [[The Black Keys]]  play their part, and in which their presence is necessary. They are also necessary as "connecting links" of soul-condition; entity states, etc., between the several other planes, certain forms of development being attained therein--this last fact giving to the reader who can "read between the lines" a new light upon the processes of Evolution, and a new key to the secret door of the "leaps of life" between kingdom and kingdom.  The great kingdoms of Elementals are fully recognized by all occultists, and the esoteric writings are full of mention of them.  The readers of Bulwer's "Sanoni" and similar tales will recognize the  [[Non-physical entity|entities]]  inhabiting these planes of life.

Passing on from the Great  [[Mental plane]]  to the Great Spiritual Plane, what shall we say? How can we explain these higher states of Being, Life and Mind, to minds as yet unable to grasp and understand the higher subdivisions of the Plane of Human Mind? The task is impossible. We can speak only in the most general terms. How may Light be described to a man born blind--how sugar, to a man who has never tasted anything sweet--how  [[Harmony]] , to one born deaf?

All that we can say is that the Seven Minor Planes of the Great Spiritual Plane (each Minor Plane having its seven sub-divisions) comprise Beings  [[Spirit possession|possessing]]  Life,  [[Mind]]  and Form as far above that of Man of to-day as the latter is above the  [[Earthworm|earth-worm]] ,  [[Mineral]]  or even certain forms of Energy or Matter. The Life of these Beings so far transcends ours, that we cannot even think of the details of the same; their minds so far transcend ours, that to them we scarcely seem to "think," and our  [[Cognition|mental processes]]  seem almost akin to material processes; the Matter of which their  [[Substantial form|forms]]  are composed is of the highest Planes of  [[Matter]] , nay, some are even said to be "clothed in Pure Energy." What may be said of such Beings?

On the Seven Minor Planes of the Great Spiritual Plane exist Beings of whom we may speak as Angels;  [[Archangel|Archangels]] ; Demi-Gods. On the lower Minor Planes dwell those great souls whom we call Masters and Adepts. Above them come the Great  [[Hierarchy|Hierarchies]]  of the Angelic Hosts, unthinkable to man; and above those come those who may without irreverence be called "The Gods," so high in the scale of Being are they, their being, intelligence and power being akin to those attributed by the races of men to their conceptions of Deity. These Beings are beyond even the highest flights of the human  [[Imagination]] , the word " [[Deity|Divine" being]]  the only one applicable to them. Many of these Beings, as well as the Angelic Host, take the greatest interest in the affairs of the Universe and play an important part in its affairs. These Unseen  [[Divinity|Divinities]]  and  [[Angel|Angelic]]  Helpers extend their  [[Social influence|influence]]  freely and powerfully, in the process of  [[Evolution]] , and Cosmic  [[Progress]] . Their occasional intervention and assistance in human affairs have led to the many  [[Legend|legends]] ,  [[Belief|beliefs]] , religions and  [[Tradition|traditions]]  of the race, past and present. They have superimposed their knowledge and power upon the  [[World]] , again and again, all under the Law of THE ALL, of course.

But, yet, even the highest of these advanced  [[Being|Beings]]  exist merely as creations of, and in, the Mind of THE ALL, and are subject to the  [[Cosmos|Cosmic]]  Processes and Universal Laws. They are still Mortal. We may call them " [[Polytheism|gods]] " if we like, but still they are but the Elder Brethren of the  [[Race (human categorization)|Race]] ,--the advanced souls who have outstripped their brethren, and who have foregone the ecstasy of Absorption by THE ALL, in order to help the race on its upward journey along The Path. But, they belong to the  [[Universe]] , and are  [[Subject (philosophy)|subject]]  to its conditions--they are  [[Human|mortal]] --and their plane is below that of  [[Absolute (philosophy)|Absolute Spirit]] .

Only the most advanced Hermetists are able to grasp the Inner Teachings regarding the state of existence, and the powers manifested on the Spiritual Planes. The phenomena is so much higher than that of the Mental Planes that a confusion of ideas would surely result from an attempt to describe the same. Only those whose minds have been carefully trained along the lines of the Hermetic Philosophy for years--yes, those who have brought with them from other  [[Incarnation|incarnations]]  the knowledge acquired previously--can comprehend just what is meant by the Teaching regarding these Spiritual Planes. And much of these Inner  [[School of thought|Teachings]]  is held by the Hermetists as being too sacred, important and even dangerous for general public dissemination. The  [[Intelligence|intelligent]]  student may recognize what we mean by this when we  [[State (polity)|state]]  that the  [[Semantics|meaning]]  of "Spirit" as used by the Hermetists is akin to " [[Life|Living]]  Power"; "Animated Force;" "Inner Essence;" "Essence of Life," etc., which  [[Meaning of life|meaning]]  must not be confounded with that usually and commonly employed in connection with the term, i.e., "religious; ecclesiastical; spiritual;  [[Aether (classical element)|ethereal]] ;  [[Sacredness|holy]] ," etc., etc. To occultists the  [[Logos|word]]  " [[Spirit (animating force)|Spirit]] " is used in the  [[Sense]]  of "The Animating Principle," carrying with it the  [[Idea]]  of Power, Living  [[Energy]] , Mystic Force, etc. And occultists know that that which is known to them as "Spiritual Power" may be employed for evil as well as  [[Good and evil|good]]  ends (in accordance with the Principle of Polarity), a fact which has been recognized by the majority of  [[Religion|religions]]  in their conceptions of Satan, Beelzebub, the Devil,  [[Satan|Lucifer]] , Fallen Angels, etc. And so the  [[Knowledge]]  regarding these Planes has been kept in the Holy of Holies in all  [[Western esotericism|Esoteric]]  Fraternities and Occult Orders,--in the Secret Chamber of the Temple. But this may be said here, that those who have attained high  [[Spiritualism|spiritual]]  powers and have misused them, have a terrible  [[Destiny|fate]]  in store for them, and the swing of the  [[Pendulum]]  of Rhythm will inevitably swing them back to the furthest extreme of  [[Materialism|Material]]   [[Existence]] , from which point they must retrace their steps Spiritward, along the weary rounds of The Path, but always with the added  [[Torture]]  of having always with them a lingering  [[Memory]]  of the heights from which they fell owing to their  [[Evil]]  actions. The legends of the  [[Fallen angel|Fallen Angels]]  have a basis in actual  [[Fact|facts]] , as all advanced  [[Occult|occultists]]  know. The striving for selfish  [[Power (social and political)|power]]  on the Spiritual Planes inevitably results in the selfish soul losing its spiritual balance and falling back as far as it had previously risen. But to even such a  [[Soul]] , the opportunity of a return is given--and such souls make the return journey, paying the terrible penalty according to the invariable  [[Jurisprudence|Law]] .

In  [[Logical consequence|conclusion]]  we would again remind you that according to the Principle of Correspondence, which embodies the truth: "As Above so Below; as Below, so Above," all of the Seven Hermetic Principles are in full  [[Scientific method|operation]]  on all of the many  [[Plane (esotericism)|planes]] , Physical Mental and  [[Spirituality|Spiritual]] . The Principle of  [[Mental substance]]  of course applies to all the planes, for all are held in the Mind of THE ALL. The Principle of Correspondence manifests in all, for there is a correspondence, harmony and agreement between the several planes. The Principle of  [[Vibration]]  manifests on all planes, in fact the very differences that go to make the "planes" arise from Vibration, as we have explained. The Principle of Polarity manifests on each  [[Plane (geometry)|plane]] , the extremes of the Poles being apparently opposite and contradictory. The Principle of Rhythm manifests on each Plane, the  [[Motion|movement]]  of the phenomena having its ebb and flow, rise and flow, incoming and outgoing. The Principle of  [[Causality|Cause and Effect]]  manifests on each Plane, every Effect having its Cause and every Cause having its effect. The Principle of  [[Gender]]  manifests on each Plane, the Creative Energy being always manifest, and operating along the lines of its  [[Masculinity|Masculine]]  and Feminine Aspects.

" [[As above, so below|As Above so Below]] ; as Below, so Above." This centuries old  [[Hermeticism|Hermetic]]   [[Axiom]]  embodies  [[Neoplatonism|one]]  of the great Principles of Universal  [[Phenomenon|Phenomena]] . As we proceed with our consideration of the remaining  [[Principle|Principles]] , we will see even more clearly the  [[Truth]]  of the  [[Universal (metaphysics)|universal]]   [[Nature]]  of this great  [[Correspondence principle|Principle of Correspondence]] .
# Metadata


- frombook [[Kybalion]]